`Beyond open access: visions for open evaluation of scientific papers by
post-publication peer review
<http://www.frontiersin.org/Computational%20Neuroscience/specialtopics/beyond_open_access__visions_fo/137>`_

Hosted By:

Diana Deca, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, UK

Deadline for submission: 15 Apr 2011

A scientific publication system needs to provide two basic services: access and
evaluation. The traditional publication system restricts the access to papers
by requiring payment, and it restricts the evaluation of papers by relying on
just 2-4 pre-publication peer reviews and by keeping the reviews secret. As a
result, the current system suffers from a lack of quality and transparency of
the peer-review evaluation process, and the only immediately available
indication of a new paperâ€™s quality is the prestige of the journal it appeared
in.

Open access is now widely accepted as desirable and is slowly beginning to
become a reality. However, the second essential element, evaluation, has
received less attention. Open evaluation, an ongoing post-publication process
of transparent peer review and rating of papers, promises to address the
problems of the current system. However, it is unclear how exactly such a
system should be designed.

The evaluation system steers the attention of the scientific community and,
thus, the very course of science. For better or worse, the most visible papers
determine the direction of each field and guide funding and public policy
decisions. Evaluation, therefore, is at the heart of the entire endeavor of
science. As the number of scientific publications explodes, evaluation and
selection will only gain importance. A grand challenge of our time, therefore,
is to design the future system, by which we evaluate papers and decide which
ones deserve broad attention.

So far scientists have left the design of the evaluation process to journals
and publishing companies. However, the steering mechanism of science should be
designed by scientists. The cognitive, computational, and brain sciences are
best prepared to take on this task, which will involve social and psychological
considerations, software design, and modeling of the network of scientific
papers and their interrelationships.

This Special Topic in Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience collects visions
for a future system of open evaluation. Because critical arguments about the
current system abound, these papers will focus on constructive ideas and
comprehensive designs for open evaluation systems. Design decisions include:
Should the reviews and ratings be entirely transparent, or should some aspects
be kept secret? Should other information, such as paper downloads be included
in the evaluation? How can scientific objectivity be strengthened and political
motivations weakened in the future system? Should the system include signed and
authenticated reviews and ratings? Should the evaluation be an ongoing process,
such that promising papers are more deeply evaluated? How can we bring science
and statistics to the evaluation process (e.g. should rating averages come with
error bars)? How should the evaluative information about each paper (e.g. peer
ratings) be combined to prioritize the literature? Should different individuals
and organizations be able to define their own evaluation formulae (e.g.
weighting ratings according to different criteria)? How can we efficiently
transition toward the future system?

Ideally, the future system will derive its authority from a scientific
literature on community-based open evaluation. We hope that these papers will
provide a starting point.

January 15 2011 for 1-page proposals
April 15, 2011 for full papers 
